Tcpdump is a popular
network analyzer.
It's pre-installed on many
Linux distributions and can be
installed on most Unix-like
operating systems, like macOS.
You can easily
capture and monitor
network traffic such as TCP,
IP, ICMP, and many more.
Tcpdump is a command line tool.
This means that it does not have
a graphical user interface.
Earlier in the program,
you learned that
the command line is
a very powerful
and efficient tool,
and we'll practice
using it together.
With tcpdump, you can apply
options and flags
to your commands to
easily filter network
traffic so that
you can find exactly
what you're looking for.
You can filter for a
specific IP address,
protocol, or port number.
Let's examine a simple
tcpdump command
used to capture packets.
Keep in mind that your
computer's traffic
may appear different when
you use this command.
At first glance, this looks
like a lot of information.
Let's examine it line by line.
The command we ran
is: sudo tcpdump -i any
-v -c 1.
We're using sudo because the
Linux account we're logged
in on doesn't have the
permission to run tcpdump.
Then, we specify tcpdump
to start tcpdump
and -i to specify which
interface we want to
sniff traffic on.
The -v stands for verbose,
which displays detailed
packet information.
The -c stands for count,
which specifies how many
packets tcpdump will capture.
Here we've specified one.
Now let's examine the output.
Tcpdump has told us
that it's listening on
any available network
interfaces, and it's also
given us additional information,
like the capture size.
The first field is the
packet's timestamp,
which details the specific
time of the packet travel.
It begins with hours, minutes,
seconds, and fractions
of a second.
Timestamps are especially
helpful during
an incident investigation
when you want to
determine timelines
and correlate traffic.
Next, IP is listed as
the Version field.
It's listed as IP,
which means it's IPv4.
The verbose option has given us
more details about
the IP packet fields,
such as protocol type and
the length of the packet.
Let's check it out.
The first field, ToS stands
for Type of Service.
Recall that this tells us if
certain packets should be
treated with different care.
This is represented by
a value in hexadecimal.
The TTL field is Time to Live,
which tells us how
long a packet can
travel across a network
before it gets dropped.
The next three fields are
Identification,
Offset, and Flags,
which provide three fields with
information relating
to fragmentation.
These fields provide
instructions on how
to reassemble packets
in the correct order.
For example the DF,
beside flags stands
for Don't Fragment.
Next, the proto is
the Protocol field.
It specifies the
protocol in use and also
provides us with the value that
corresponds to the protocol.
Here the protocol is tcp,
which is represented
by the number 6.
The last field, length, is the
Total Length of the packet,
including the IP header.
Next, we can observe
the IP addresses that are
communicating with each other.
The direction of the arrow
indicates the direction
of the traffic flow.
The last piece of the IP address
indicates the port
number or name.
Next, the cksum or checksum
field corresponds to
the Header Checksum, which
stores a value that's
used to determine if
any errors have
occurred in the header.
Here, it's telling us it's
correct with no errors.
The remaining fields
are related to TCP.
For example, Flags
indicate TCP flags.
The P is the push flag, and
the period indicates
it's an ACK flag.
This means that the packet
is pushing out data.
This is just one of many
commands you can use
in tcpdump to capture
network traffic.
Isn't it fascinating to observe
all the information contained
within these invisible packets?
Go ahead and try it
out for yourself!